
Prediction of chronic damage in systemic lupus erythematosus using neural networks

Category: Organ damage and survival
3200 characters

Purpose: The prevention of chronic damage is a major goal in the management of SLE patients. 
In the study published so far, up to 50% of patients develop damage after 10 years from the diagnosis. 
In the present study, we aimed at predicting chronic damage in a large monocentric SLE cohort by using neural networks. 

Methods: We enrolled 357 consecutive patients affected by SLE diagnosed according to the American College of Rheumatology (ACR) 1997 revised criteria 
(M/F 27/330; mean age ±SD 40.9 ± 12.9 years; mean disease duration ±SD 106.8 ± 98.4 months) referring to an out-patient Lupus Clinic. 
Chronic damage was determined by using the SLICC/ACR Damage Index (SDI).
Predictors of patients at increased risk of damage were identified and validated using recurrent neural networks, a data mining model
that automatically learns from data using sequential information.
In our setting we have used, as input to the neural network, 
the set of available features (27) describing the clinical status of the patients observed in the sequential
visits performed in the years. The binary output of the neural network (for the classification task) indicates whether or not 
a chronic damage will be detected at the next visit of a given patient.

Results: At the time of the first visit in the Lupus Clinic, 137 patients (38.4%) showed chronic damage, defined as SDI=1.
The training and test sets were built by data of patients having at least six visits.
Thus, experiments were performed by using the data of 40 patients  with damage (positive examples) and of 100 patients without
damage (positive examples). 
The available data were randomly splitted into eight different training and test sets preserving the percentage
of positive and negative examples.
The recurrent neural network was trained by a standard stochastic gradient descent method.
The area under receiver-operator characteristic curves (AUC) was used to measure the discrimination ability of the 
neural network prediction model. The average AUC obtained for the eight folds was 0.74. 



Conclusion: 
